---
title: St. Bartholomew, Apostle
date: 2025-08-24
slug: st-bart-august-24-2025
pastor: Rev. James Woelmer
description: Persevere with Faith in Christ
theme: Persevere with Faith in Christ
scripture: John 1:43-51
lectionary: https://lectionary.christlutheranmanhattan.org/#/2025/8/24/

---

<iframe title="St. Bartholomew, Apostle – August 24, 2025" allowtransparency="true" height="150" width="100%" style="border: none; min-width: min(100%, 430px);height:150px;" scrolling="no" data-name="pb-iframe-player" src="https://www.podbean.com/player-v2/?i=w9uqm-1942782-pb&from=pb6admin&share=1&download=1&rtl=0&fonts=Arial&skin=1&font-color=auto&logo_link=episode_page&btn-skin=7" loading="lazy"></iframe>

On this day, August 24, the church has for over 1,000 years remembered the Apostle, Bartholomew. This day might be the day he was martyred for confessing Christ as our one and only Savior.

Bartholomew, along with all of the Apostles except John, died a martyrs’ death. Revelation 12:11 describes them, “They did not love their lives even in the face of death.” In other words, they did not cling to the things of this world, but they remained faithful unto death. They gave their lives rather than retract their testimony to Jesus’ resurrection.

We do not glorify Bartholomew, but we thank God for keeping him faithful in his office as an Apostle. We thank God for giving him strength and perseverance in the midst of life and death. We pray that we may imitate his faith and his holy living according to our calling in life and that God would keep us faithful unto death.

Who was Bartholomew? He was one of Jesus’ 12 disciples. Matthew 10:2-4 gives us their names: Peter, Andrew, James the son of Zebedee, John, Philip, Bartholomew, Thomas, Mathew, James the son of Alphaeus, Thaddaeus, Simon the Cananaean, and Judas Iscariot. Some of these disciples we know very well because they are mentioned often in the Gospels, such as Peter, James, and John. While others, we don’t know much about, like Bartholomew.

In the list of disciples, Philip is number 5 and Bartholomew is number 6. In other words, Philip and Bartholomew are always together. It is interesting to note that the Gospel of John never mentions Bartholomew. However, in the list of disciples in the Gospel of John, Philip and Nathanael are together. According to scholars, Nathanael is Bartholomew. Nathanael was his first name whereas Bartholomew describes where he is from. He is the son of Tholomew. 

At the time of our Holy Gospel for today, Jesus had already called Andrew, Peter, and Philip as disciples. Philip, then, told Nathanael (who is Bartholomew) that the Messiah—the promised Savior—is here. Philip goes on to say that he is from Nazareth. Nathanael (who is Bartholomew) is skeptical that this Jesus is the Messiah because the promised Savior is supposed to be born in Bethlehem not in Nazareth. Philip said to Nathanael, “Come and see.” In other words, “ Come with me and see that Jesus is the promised Savior. Hear what He has to say.” So, when Nathanael approached Jesus, Jesus identified Nathanael as a true Israelite who has faith in the coming Messiah. Nathanael has no deceit or guile because his sins are forgiven through faith in the promised Savior. Nathanael was amazed that Jesus knew him. Furthermore, Jesus even knew that Nathanael was under the fig tree, studying the Scriptures. How did Jesus know him? Well, Jesus is the Son of God in human flesh. He knows all things. Nathanael, then, believed that Jesus is the Messiah—the promised Savior. He gives a wonderful and beautiful confession about Jesus. He said of Jesus, “Rabbi, you are the Son of God!” Then he also confessed saying, “You are the King of Israel.” Both of these confessions are correct. Jesus, then, said that Nathanael (who is Bartholomew) will see greater things. He will see heaven opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of Man.

Bartholomew was with Jesus along with the other disciples for three years. Bartholomew heard Jesus preach and teach. He saw Jesus perform miracles. He saw Jesus being nailed to the cross. Three days later, he saw the resurrected Christ.

Can any good come out of Jesus being crucified? Yes, sins are now paid for by the blood of Christ, and God’s wrath is appeased. Can any good come out of Easter? Yes, Jesus rose from the dead, and He lives forevermore. Heaven is now open. The angels of God ascend and descend on the Son of Man. Jesus is the bridge or the ladder to heaven. He is the way, the truth, and the life. No one comes to the Father except through faith in Christ.

On the evening of Easter, the disciples were in a room with the doors being locked for fear of the Jews. Jesus came and stood among them. He said to them, “As the Father has sent me, even so I am sending you.” Jesus ordained them as Apostles. Forty days later, Batholomew and the other disciples witnessed the Ascension of our Lord. Ten days later, being in Jerusalem, they witnessed the coming of the Holy Spirit.

After Pentecost, apostles traveled to the four corners of the world to spread the news that Jesus died for our sins and that He rose from the dead. Some went to Europe, others went to Asia, and others went to Africa and throughout the world. They testified to the forgiveness of sins because of the resurrection of our Lord. They baptized and taught the Word of God. They absolved sin. They preached the Gospel. They administered the Lord’s Supper. They comforted the sick and the dying. They took care of the flock entrusted to them.

According to tradition in the Church, Bartholomew first carried the Gospel to India and gave them a copy of the Gospel of Matthew. Then, he carried the Gospel to Armenia. There he had success in converting the king, but the king’s brother was so angered at this that he had Bartholomew beheaded. He died a martyrs death.

What lessons do we learn?

First, we learn about evangelism and mission. Just as Philip said to Nathanael, “Come and see.” So also, we can talk with our unchurched family and friends about Jesus. We can tell them that He died for their sins and that He rose from the dead. Better yet, invite them to “come and see.” Invite them to the Divine Service where they can hear with their own ears the precious Gospel. Just as the Apostles had a missionary zeal, may we too, have a passion for seeking the lost in our own neighborhood and with those around us, but also in our district and throughout the world. Support evangelism and mission endeavors with your gifts and your prayers.

Can any good come out of simple water and word put on someone’s head? Yes, in baptism God saves the sinner. Can any good come out of a preacher preaching from the pulpit? Yes, sins are forgiven and removed. Faith is strengthened and we learn how to love what God commands and how to care for others. Can any good come out of bread and wine from the altar? Yes, Christ’s body and blood are given for the forgiveness of sins. Where is Jesus? He is here with His life-giving Word and His precious Gospel. Put doubt and skepticism aside. Good does come to you today for you and for your salvation.

Second, we learn that because of the death and resurrection of our Lord, heaven is open. Jesus is the bridge or the ladder between earth and heaven. He is our only way to heaven. He is our only source of truth, and He is our only source of life. No one comes to the Father except through faith in Christ.

Third, Jesus wants His Gospel in Word and Sacraments to go out to all nations. So, he ordained his disciples to be Apostles and men are ordained today into an office of the Holy Ministry. The pastoral office is not an option. God wants qualified and trained men to baptize and to teach, to absolve sin, to preach repentance and the forgiveness of sins, to administer the Lord’s Supper, to comfort and sick and the dying, and to take care of the flock entrusted to them. The pastoral office is not an option, it is a necessary gift from God for your sake and for your salvation. Pray for your pastor that he may remain faithful. I’m sure that he prays for you as well. If you know of a young man who would be a faithful pastor, please encourage him to consider going to the seminary and pursuing the office of the holy ministry. But everyone here can advance the Gospel among us by serving on the Altar guild, by greeting visitors, by serving in various positions of leadership, by your tithe and offering, or by just praying for the church.

Fourth, just as Bartholomew was faithful to our Lord, so also, may we be faithful to God and to His Word. May He bless us in our various vocations as we love and serve family, friends, and others. Avoid false doctrine and remain faithful to God and to His Word. May we be lights in a dark world proclaiming Christ as our one and only Savior. When you were confirmed, the question was asked of you, “Do you intend to continue steadfast in this confession and Church and to suffer all, even death, rather than fall away from it?” And you answered, “I do, by the grace of God.”

Fifth, just as Bartholomew persevered in the midst of hostility, so also, may God give us the ability to persevere in the midst of a world hostile to the Gospel. The Gospel does face opposition. The message of the cross is offense to some. If we are made fun of because we believe in Christ, then count it all joy. Press on toward the goal of heaven. Don’t throw in the towel. Don’t comprise with the devil and go the way of unbelief. Don’t give in to the immorality of our culture. Love your enemies and pray for those who persecute you so that they may be converted and come to faith in Christ. May God help us to speak the truth in love so that others may be converted and come to faith in Christ. We are not ashamed of the Gospel. It brings us comfort, peace, and joy. We are in the world, but we are not of the world. We are of Christ.

Finally, Bartholomew died a martyrs death. He is now with our Lord in heaven awaiting the resurrection of the body. Most likely, we will not die a martyrs death. But when our last day will come, then we will walk through the shadow of death. We will, then, dwell in the house of the Lord forever.

But while we remain here on earth, may God keep us in the faith and may He help us to love and serve one another reflecting the light of Christ. Amen.