---
title: Fourth Sunday after Trinity
date: 2025-07-13
slug: trinity-4-july-13-2025
pastor: Rev. James Woelmer
description: The Father's Mercy
theme: The Father's Mercy
scripture: Luke 6:36-42
lectionary: https://lectionary.christlutheranmanhattan.org/#/2025/7/13/

---

<iframe title="Fourth Sunday after Trinity – July 13, 2025" allowtransparency="true" height="150" width="100%" style="border: none; min-width: min(100%, 430px);height:150px;" scrolling="no" data-name="pb-iframe-player" src="https://www.podbean.com/player-v2/?i=rm3es-190447a-pb&from=pb6admin&share=1&download=1&rtl=0&fonts=Arial&skin=1&font-color=auto&logo_link=episode_page&btn-skin=7" loading="lazy"></iframe>

I’m sure you’ve heard the phrase, “Like father, like son.” It means that a son resembles his father—not just in appearance, but in words and actions. If you want to know what a father is like, just look at his son.

So also, if you want to know what our heavenly Father is like, look at the baptized. We, as God’s children reflect our heavenly Father in what we say and do. Now, we don’t always do this perfectly. We fall short. Yet, it is our prayer that the mercy and forgiveness we receive from our heavenly Father would be reflected through us to others.

There are four things that we will learn today. First, God has shown us mercy. Therefore, we freely show mercy to others. Second, God does not judge us because Jesus was judged as guilty in our place. God has declared us righteous on account of His Son. Therefore, we do not judge others with a self-righteous attitude. Third, God in Christ Jesus forgives all our sins. Therefore, we forgive those who sin against us. And finally, God has been generous to us. He gave us life. He gives us daily bread, and the gift of eternal life. Therefore, we freely give to others.

**The first thing we learn from our text for today is this: Show mercy to others**. Jesus said, “Be merciful, even as your Father is merciful.” Throughout His ministry, Jesus showed mercy again and again. When the ten lepers cried out, “Jesus, Master, have mercy on us,” He did. He healed all ten of them. The blind, the lame, and the sick also cried out for mercy, and Jesus responded with compassion and healing.

But for us showing mercy to others is not always easy. In fact, it often goes against our sinful nature. Inwardly, we are selfish and greedy. We make excuses, such as, “We are too busy” or “We are too tired to help others.” When we act this way, we reflect not our heavenly Father, but our earthly father, Adam. 

Because of Adam’s fall into sin, we were cast into darkness. We were trapped in the prison house of death. Our righteousness was stripped of us, and we stood naked in guilt and shame. We were even cast out of the garden of Eden.

And so, God the Father had mercy on us. He sent His only begotten Son to save us. Jesus kept the law perfectly in our place. He paid for our sin, and he died the death we were supposed to die. And then, He rose from the dead.

In your baptism, Jesus pulled you out of the dark pit. He is now your light. He freed you from the prison house of death and He is now your source of life. You were naked in sin, but you are now clothed with the robe of Christ’s righteousness.

So, God the Father has been merciful to you. Therefore, be merciful to others. Love them. Help them when they are in need. Care for them when they are hurting. In this way, you reflect the mercy of our heavenly Father.

**The second thing we learn from our text today is this: Do not judge**. Jesus said, “Judge not, and you will not be judged; condemn not, and you will not be condemned.” 

These two words—judge not—are some of the most misunderstood words of all time. When the Christian takes a stand on what is good and what is evil, the world, then, labels the Christian as being judgmental.

Jesus is not saying that we should abolishing courts of law or any civil judgments. He is not saying that we should silence parents who teach their children right from wrong. He is not saying that pastors should no longer preach both Law and Gospel. He is not saying that we should ignore false doctrine.

What is Jesus saying? When Jesus says, “Judge not,” He is warning us against having a self-righteous attitude. He is warning us against finding fault in others while ignoring our own sin. He is warning us of petty criticisms. We like to magnify a neighbor’s sin because it makes our own sin seem smaller.

Jesus illustrates this by saying, “Why do you see the speck that is in your brother’s eye, but do not notice the log that is in your own eye? How can you say to your brother, ‘Brother, let me take out the speck that is in your eye,’ when you yourself do not see the log that is in your own eye?” His point is this … being blind toward our own sin prevents us from helping others.

Jesus came down from heaven in order to help us. He took our sins upon Himself. Jesus bore the wrath of God in our place. He was judged guilty because our sin was upon him. He made the perfect payment for our sin. He died, then rose from the dead. There is now peace and reconciliation with our heavenly Father. On the last day, Christ will not render a guilty judgment upon us. Rather, He will declare us to be justified because of His righteousness.

Jesus says, ‘first take the log out of your own eye.” How do we get it out? We cannot reform ourselves. Self-help programs won’t do it. Only God can help us. First, the Holy Spirit works repentance in our hearts. Then the Gospel removes the log; removes our sin as far as the east is from the west. God sees our sin no more. It is removed.

Jesus said, “Then you will see clearly to take out the speck that is in your brother’s eye.” There are times when a fellow brother or sister in Christ needs correction. How can we help them? Go to them privately. Help them gently—with a genuine concern. Speak the truth of God’s Word with sincere love and with deep humility.

So, because Christ bore the judgment we deserve, we do not judge others. We help our neighbor who is in need. In this way, we reflect our heavenly Father.

**The third thing we learn from our text is this: Forgive others**. Jesus said, “Forgive, and you will be forgiven.” To forgive those who wronged us is one of the hardest things to do in life. We want to retaliate. We want to hold a grudge. We want them to feel pain, too. The devil tempts us to seek revenge. Don’t fall for the devil’s trap. Rather, forgive others just as our heavenly Father forgives you.

Forgiveness toward those who have wronged us is hard to do, but forgiving them does not mean that a wrong becomes a right. Forgiveness does not mean that we excuse what others did wrong. Forgiveness does not mean that sin has no consequence. If a thief robs your home, the authorities are right to administer justice. But you are not given permission to retaliate or take vengeance into your own hands.

What they did to you was wrong, but by God’s grace, you will not return evil for evil. You will not retaliate against them.

God sent His only begotten Son to bear your sin and to suffer in your place. You repent of your sin and God in Christ Jesus freely forgives you. You confess your sin, and God speaks His absolution upon you. Forgiveness first comes to you from God, then it flows out from you to others. You forgive because God has first forgiven you.

So, when you forgive one another, you reflect the forgiveness you first received from your heavenly Father.

**The final thing we learn from our text for today is this: Give generously**. Jesus said, “Give, and it will be given to you. Good measure, pressed down, shaken together, running over, will be put into your lap.” These words remind us of the overflowing generosity of God. His love for you knows no limit. His goodness toward you is abundant, poured out, and overflowing.

Just think of all that your heavenly Father has given you. He gave you life in your mother’s womb. He gave you new life in the waters of holy baptism. Every day He sustains you with food, clothing, shelter, and countless blessings. He watches over your life and cares for all your needs.

Even more, He has given you His own Son. Jesus shed His blood to redeem you. In Him your sins are forgiven. In this Holy Supper, He gives you His own body and blood and the gift of life and salvation. Christ is your refuge and strength. He is your light and your salvation.

Because God has been so generous to you, be generous in return. Support your family with love and care. Give to the Church so that the Gospel may continue among us. Help the poor and need. Giving is not a burden but a joyful response to the riches of God’s grace. When you give, you are simply reflecting the heart of your heavenly Father.

So, in summary. First, God has shown us mercy. Therefore, we freely show mercy to others. Second, God does not judge us because Jesus was judged as guilty in our place. God has declared us righteous on account of His Son. Therefore, we do not judge others with a self-righteous attitude. Third, God in Christ Jesus forgives all our sins. Therefore, we forgive those who sin against us. And finally, God has been generous to us. He gave us life. He gives us daily bread, and the gift of eternal life. Therefore, we freely give to others. In all these ways, our words and actions reflect our heavenly Father. All glory be to God alone. Amen.